Update the moderation policy to OpenJS escalation path, have TSC handle TSC reports (#990)
nodejs/admin: Moderation-Policy.md

* [ljharb](https://github.com/ljharb) -
  **Jordan Harband** &lt;ljharb@gmail.com&gt;

## Escalation of issues

> Any decisions done by the moderation team can be escalated to the
> [OpenJS Code of Conduct Team](https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/blob/main/conduct/COC_POLICY.md#escalation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any code of conduct report, and any decision made by the moderation team, can
be escalated to the [OpenJS Code of Conduct Team](https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/blob/main/conduct/COC_POLICY.md#escalation).
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ו
```suggestion

Upon request, any information regarding an escalated report requested by the OpenJS Code of Conduct team will be supplied to them by the moderation team after approval by the TSC.
```

Reviewer 3: strong -1: the [escalation policy](https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/blob/main/conduct/COC_POLICY.md#escalation) already states

> Projects are expected to participate in good faith in the escalation process and to share all the information related to the incident report with the CoC Team.

* [ljharb](https://github.com/ljharb) -
  **Jordan Harband** &lt;ljharb@gmail.com&gt;

## Escalation of issues

Any code of conduct report, and any decision made by the moderation team, can
be escalated to the [OpenJS Code of Conduct Team](https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/blob/main/conduct/COC_POLICY.md#escalation).

> Upon request, any information regarding an escalated report requested by the OpenJS Code of Conduct team will be supplied to them by the moderation team after approval by the TSC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upon request, any information regarding an escalated report requested by the OpenJS Code of Conduct team will be supplied to them by the moderation team after approval by the TSC.
```

Actually, this last part I'm not sure about, "after approval by the TSC". It actually shouldn't be subject to TSC approval, especially if a member of the TSC is a party to the complaint. I think instead this should say that the information will be supplied and the TSC will be notified about what information is shared.

Reviewer 2: @jasnell I want the TSC to OK any information exiting the project, even if we come up with a really short process I do not want information to transfer automatically. Note the requirements for moderation team membership are basically self-nomination + 7 days without objections.

I trust the current team members' judgment but this isn't a high bar, and I consider this information as important as our release keys given the impact it can have on peoples' careers and lives.

Reviewer: This is likely a detail we need to work out with the CPC as it is definitely a grey area. The policy says we need to cooperate with the escalation, it's just not clear what actual role the TSC has in that escalation path. The TSC reviewing and approving what information can be shared feels a lot like the TSC inserting itself into the process without actually having a policy basis. But, I agree it's something that needs to be considered and discussed.

Reviewer 4: FYI: from the perspective of the CPC, the delegation is to the project itself, not to a particular governing body within it. So whether and how the Node TSC creates a CoC team, and the relation it has with it, is something for the Node TSC to decide, not for the CPC.

That said, the [CoC policy states](https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/blob/HEAD/conduct/COC_POLICY.md#appeals) that _"the project is expected […] to share all the information related to the incident report with the CoC Team."_ As abiding by this policy is a condition for delegation, there's no room for the TSC (or anyone else for that matter) to prevent information sharing with the CoC Team (which, like everyone involved in resolving an incident, is subject to the same [confidentiality policy](https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/blob/HEAD/conduct/COC_POLICY.md#confidentiality)).

Also worth noting the [record keeping obligations](https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/blob/HEAD/conduct/COC_POLICY.md#record-keeping) which should help scope what needs to be transferred to the CoC Team.

> Upon request, any information regarding an escalated report requested by the OpenJS Code of Conduct team will be supplied to them by the moderation team after approval by the TSC.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Upon request, any information regarding an escalated report requested by the OpenJS Code of Conduct team will be supplied to them by the moderation team after approval by the parties involved in the collection of the information.
```

The current wording seems to imply that the moderation team can just supply confidential information to the OpenJS CoC team without consent from people providing the confidential information, which I guess is unintentional because in practice that's always a prerequisite no matter who the information is being shared to.

* [ljharb](https://github.com/ljharb) -
  **Jordan Harband** &lt;ljharb@gmail.com&gt;

## Escalation of issues

Any code of conduct report, and any decision made by the moderation team, can

> be escalated to the [OpenJS Code of Conduct Team](https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/blob/main/conduct/COC_POLICY.md#escalation).

Reviewer 4: By the way, the CoC policy makes a distinction between escalation and appeal and your policy should address both.

> Upon request, any information regarding an escalated report requested by the OpenJS Code of Conduct team will be supplied to them by the moderation team

Reviewer 5: I still think we need to have some sort of on-record/off-record process to make sure that the information being shared is clearly on-record, and avoid accidentally leaking the information shared to the moderation team member that is not meant to be on-record and shared to another party without prior consent.

For a purely hypothetical example, if I filed a CoC complaint because of discriminatory conduct against my nationality, and during the handling I shared to a moderation team member (whose political tendencies were known to me and made me feel comfortable) about my views or plans about my nationality, I would prefer this communication to not be shared to people with unknown political tendencies, as there would not necessarily be evidence that the OpenJS CoC team member being delegated to handle the case has a political tendency that would make me feel comfortable about sharing these information. It would make the whole thing much more comfortable if I was notified beforehand whether the conversation would be shared to somebody else, so that I could go off-record when sharing those views that may be necessary as context to people who I trust, but keep the on-record information less explicit.

Reviewer 4: I suggest raising this with the CPC. IMHO, this is best handled by folks being explicit about the confidentiality of what they’re sharing with someone and not formalizing this further, but others may have different opinions.

Reviewer 5: > this is best handled by folks being explicit about the confidentiality of what they’re sharing with someone and not formalizing this further

Note that in https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/58837, several TSC member stressed that "not objecting to being recorded should not be interpreted as agreeing to be recorded" and raised the legal risks about privacy, and https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/58925 took great care to make sure that recording or summarizing the private meetings within the TSC, or sharing it to anyone outside the meeting must obtain approval. I think this means if any part of the moderation process ended up being touched on in the TSC meeting and the information - even just a summary - from the meeting got automatically shared to a party not present at the meeting without approval, it would be in conflict with the TSC governance documentation, unless we modify the TSC governance to make exception to skip consent collection for moderation appeals.

Reviewer 4: You will indeed have to fix whatever prevents you from abiding by the CoC policy. Imho, circulating meeting notes / minutes after a CoC incident-related call should give everyone a chance to avoid being misquoted and address the concerns raised.

Reviewer 5: IANAL but out of curiosity, I looked it up in GDPR and I think at least in EU this may be a situation where GDPR applies (https://gdpr-info.eu/art-2-gdpr) and in the example I raised, transmitting that part of the communication between the two groups as part of a filing system may have been straight up forbidden: https://gdpr-info.eu/art-9-gdpr

Reviewer 4: I believe that’s covered by the [privacy policy](https://privacy-policy.openjsf.org/) and would fall under legitimate interest from a GDPR perspective. Either way, that’s a foundation counsel issue, not something we should be discussing here. If you have concerns with the foundation’s privacy policy, feel free to reside it with the CPC.

Reviewer 5: I agree it should be raised to CPC for more oversight - @mcollina it seems to me the privacy policy does not automatically exempt the current wording, e.g. GDPR guideline https://www.edpb.europa.eu/system/files/2024-10/edpb_guidelines_202401_legitimateinterest_en.pdf:

> Assessing what is “necessary” involves ascertaining whether in practice the legitimate data processing
interests pursued cannot reasonably be achieved just as effectively by other means less restrictive of the
fundamental rights and freedoms of data subjects. If there are reasonable, just as effective, but less
intrusive alternatives, the processing may not be considered to be “necessary”. In this context, the CJEU
expressly recalled that the condition relating to the need for processing must be examined in conjunction
with the “data minimisation” principle enshrined in Article 5(1)(c) GDPR, in accordance with which
personal data must be “adequate, relevant and limited to what is necessary in relation to the purposes
for which they are processed”.

So while a summary about the hypothetical conversation, with sensitive details reducted, might meet the three part test of GDPR, a complete export of the chat history - even if it's requested - may not - unless there's explicit consent to provide it, in that case this can be evaluated differently.

Author: I've opened this issue: https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/issues/1522.

I've also removed the sharing information text and linked directly to the CPC escalation and appeal processes, as those are essentially the key policies managing this and that text was redundant.

I consider this resolved - the GDPR question would be handled by the CPC, possibly escalating to Foundation legal.
